Panda3D Manual

Welcome to the Panda3D documentation! Panda3D is an open-source,
free-to-use 3D engine made for the development of realtime 3D games,
visualizations, simulations, experiments â€” you name it! It consists of a
library of subroutines that can be used with either the Python or C++
programming language, as well as a few tools to assist with development
and debugging.

python

There are two versions of the manual: one for Python users and one for
C++ users. Use the link in the sidebar to switch between the versions.
You are currently viewing the manual for Python users.

cpp

There are two versions of the manual: one for Python users and one for
C++ users. Use the link in the sidebar to switch between the versions.
You are currently viewing the manual for C++ users.

The manual is divided up into sections, which are listed below. You can
at any time use the sidebar on the left side to navigate between the
different sections and their contained pages.

Introduction

We recommend that beginners start out by reading through the
Introduction <intro> section, which walks through the process of
installing Panda3D and ends with a "Hello World" tutorial explaining how
to create a very small Panda3D program, to get a sense for what using
the engine looks like.

introduction/index

Programming with Panda3D

This section of the manual explains the various features of Panda3D and
the various concepts that underpin the library. It is littered with
example code and links to the API reference <reference>, which should be
studied side-by-side with the manual to get a full understanding of how
to operate the various classes.

programming/index

Asset Pipeline

This section explains how to get artistic content (such as models and
textures) produced in other programs imported into Panda3D.

pipeline/index

Debugging

This section documents the various methods that can be employed in order
to find problems in a Panda3D program.

debugging/index

Performance Optimization

Performance optimization is often a necessary step in the production of
a 3D game in order to make the game work on as broad a range of computer
hardware as possible. This section explains how to find and fix
performance issues using the powerful performance analysis tools that
Panda3D offers.

optimization/index

Distribution

This section explains how to compile a completed Panda3D application
into an executable file and package it up for distribution.

distribution/index

API Reference

This section contains a complete listing of all the classes and
functions that are a part of the Panda3D API.

reference/index

More Resources

Aside from this manual, there are a number of other resources that may
be useful when studying Panda3D, including books, sample programs, and
user-contributed tutorials. This section contains links to those other
resources.

more-resources/index

Getting Help

If you are struggling with understanding or using Panda3D, feel free to
ask the community! There is a passionate community around Panda3D that
is here to help. You can post a question on the discussion forum, visit
our Discord server or visit the #panda3d channel on the Libera.Chat IRC
server.

glossary
